Torture and killings of civilians by army
and government intelligence units is increasing in Uganda, Amnesty
International charged today.
   The London-based human rights organization said most reports of
abuses came from northern and eastern Uganda, where government
troops have been battling several rebel groups for the past three
years.
   In its report, Amnesty said about 3,000 alleged political
prisoners are being held without charge or trial, most detained by
the army on suspicion of aiding or belonging to rebel groups.
   Amnesty said President Yoweri Museveni, who came to power in
1986, brought an ``immediate end to the gross human rights
violations inflicted by previous governments'' but recent reports of
rape, torture, murder and illegal detention generally have been
ignored by the government.
   The group called on the Museveni government to investigate the
reports.
   It said it had received a government promise in December to
investigate reports of army killings of unarmed civilians in
northern Uganda but that a month later two Amnesty representatives
checking the investigation's progress were expelled from the area
where the killings reportedly occurred.
   The report noted that Museveni's government established a
commission to investigate human rights abuses during the previous
regimes of presidents Idi Amin and Milton Obote, when hundreds of
thousands of Ugandans were killed by army, intelligence and
paramilitary groups.
   But it said the commission had been hamperep my lack of resources
including stationery, office equipment and transportation and ``in
early 1989 its final report still seemed as far away as ever.''