From 18th-century France to the backroads of
1960s Mississippi to today's corporate Manhattan, the Academy Award
nominees for best picture of 1988 offer a wide range of place and
theme.
   But the front-runner seems to be ``Rain Man,'' the saga of an
autistic savant kidnapped by his cold-hearted brother, which has
already won the Directors Guild award for its director, Barry
Levinson.
   ``Rain Man'' had its problems before production. Dustin Hoffman
was intrigued with playing a retarded man, gifted with a genius for
numbers. The role of the autistic man's brother, a scheming
salesman, was closer to Hoffman's age, but the actor heeded his
agent's advice after Hoffman and Warren Beatty's ``Ishtar''
disaster: Don't put two middle-aged actors on the screen. Hearthrob
Tom Cruise jumped at the chance to act with Hoffman.
   Directors Martin Brest, Steven Spielberg and Sydney Pollack
undertook ``Rain Man'' in succession; all three withdrew for various
reasons. The project soon began to look like one of those dream
movies that never get made.
   Then Hoffman met Levinson (``Good Morning, Vietnam'') at a
performance of the Cirque de Soleil in Santa Monica, Calif. Levinson
directed ``Rain Man'' under schedule and $2.5 million under the $24
million budget (including an estimated $5 million apiece for the
stars). The film has grossed $126.1 million.
   ``Dangerous Liaisons'' is another film with an unsettled history.
The source material, Choderlos de Laclos' 1782 novel about sexual
intrigue among French aristocrats, long had been overlooked by a
Hollywood that disfavored costume dramas. ``Don't give me any
pictures where they write with feathers,'' Jack Warner is reported
to have once said.
   When ``Les Liaisons Dangereuses'' became a hit play in London and
New York, Lorimar Telepictures bought the rights and hired the
playwright Christopher Hampton to write the script. The movie was
filmed in France as Lorimar's fortunes were flagging. Also, Milos
Forman was shooting another version of Laclos' work.
   After British director Stephen Frears had made ``Dangerous
Liaisons'' (the title anglicized for Americans), Lorimar sold out to
Warner Bros. Despite fears the movie would be ditched, Warners has
given it a decent and slow release, hoping for word-of-mouth
support. The gross after 11 weeks: $21.2 million.
   The most controversial of the film nominees is ``Mississippi
Burning,'' a fictionalized account of the investigation of the 1964
murder of three civil rights worker in Neshoba County, Miss. The
Chris Gerolmo script, directed by Alan Parker, tells the story
through the eyes of two FBI investigators, played by Gene Hackman
and Willem Dafoe.
   ``Mississippi Burning'' was attacked by those who participated
and reported the 1964 Freedom Summer. Said author David Halberstam,
who covered the story for the New York Times: ``Parker has taken a
terribly moving and haunting story and he has betrayed it, turned it
into a Martin-and-Lewis slapstick between two cops. It's a bad
movie: `Mississippi False.'''
   ``It was unfortunate that it was so narrow in scope that it did
not show one black role model that today's youth who look at the
movie could remember,'' said Myrlie Evers, whose activist husband,
Medgar Evers, was murdered by white segregationists outside his
Mississippi home in 1963.
   Gerolmo, not an Oscar nominee, replied: ``I never understood this
to be Hollywood's `civil rights' picture. It's an exciting story
about something important. You see our moral failures and greatness.
It allows us to see America at its very worst and also to see people
who displayed great moral courage.''
   ``Mississippi Burning'' (the FBI code for the case) drew mixed
reviews, several awards and only fair business ($28.8 million in 13
weeks).
   ``The Accidental Tourist'' marks the third collaboration between
actor William Hurt and director Lawrence Kasdan; they also worked
together on ``Body Heat'' and ``The Big Chill.'' In the new film
Hurt plays a travel writer who writes books for people who hate to
travel. His private life is torn between his estranged wife
(Kathleen Turner) and an uninhibited dog trainer (Geena Davis).
   While reviews were generally excellent, some criticized the
passivity of Hurt's character. ``What's wrong with the heroism of a
man who has traveled two inches?'' Hurt replies. ``That two inches
is very profound.''
   ``The Accidental Tourist'' has had a fairly good response at the
box office: $28.8 million in 11 weeks. But receipts have dropped off
in recent weeks.
   ``Working Girl'' gives top billing to Harrison Ford and Sigourney
Weaver, but they are virtually supporting players to third-billed
Melanie Griffith. She plays the central figure of Tess McGill, a
shrewd, ambitious secretary who uses tricks worthy of the CIA to
climb to the top of the corporate ladder.
   The script bounced around 20th Century Fox until it reached Mike
Nichols, who agreed to direct. ``One of the hardest things for a
director to find in the '80s is a good story,'' he says.
   ``Every actress in town wanted this part,'' says Melanie
Griffith. ``You should see the script. I'm on every page.''
   Because Nichols insisted on the little-known Griffith (``you can
see right into her feelings,'' he said), Fox paid big salaries to
Ford and Weaver to assure star value.
   Though some critics twitted ``Working Girl'' as a fairy tale,
most were favorable. Audiences agreed. The gross so far: $54.2
million in 11 weeks.