The chief of a volunteer fire department
says he doesn't want women firefighters in his station house because
it might lead to ``hanky-panky.''
   Two women who have tried to join the North Belle Vernon Fire
Department three times have asked the state to intervene.
   ``I don't have anything against them, except they're female,''
said Chief Robert E. Whitelaw Jr.
   ``When you have women in a fire department, there's the
possibility for hanky-panky,'' he said. ``And even if there wasn't
hanky-panky, people would think there was, and we don't need even
the thoughts of it.''
   Whitelaw said that if women are accepted, he might use his
authority to make them reconsider.
   ``I might require more from the ladies than the men as far as
training and fire school go,'' he said.
   Whitelaw's comments angered Nancy Kinik, 38, and Robin Michael,
33, who have been trying since July to join the department and have
been voted down each time by the all-male organization.
   The most recent vote, on March 13, was 28-7, Mrs. Michael said.
   ``The more I read (the chief's comments), the madder I get,''
Mrs. Kinik said Monday. ``I am a married woman and that just doesn't
look good. I don't know what kind of dirty, sleazy mind he has, but
I don't like him saying that.''
   Both women are married to firefighters who belong to the
department and both men voted in favor of their wives joining.
   Mrs. Kinik and Mrs. Michael filed a sex discrimination complaint
against the fire department with the Pennsylvania Human Relations
Commission. The commission held a hearing in November but has not
issued a decision.
   Company President Roger Nogy said the fire company ``has no
official comment to make in regards to the issue.''
   ``Any comments being made are strictly individual opinions and
should not be misinterpreted as official statements by the fire
department,'' he said.